# web-note2

# Javascript

JavaScript is a scripting or programming language that allows you to implement complex features on web pages.

JavaScript is used ***to add interactivity to websites, to develop mobile apps, desktop applications, games*** and nowadays JavaScript can be used for **server-side programming**, ***machine learning*** and ***AI***.

Is a scripting language that enables you to create dynamically updating content, control multimedia, animate images, and pretty much everything else. 

# how can install Node.js?

1. Step 1: Download the Installer. Download the Windows Installer from NodeJs official website. ...
2. Step 2: Install Node.js and NPM. After choosing the path, double-click to install .msi binary files to initiate the installation process. ...
3. Step 3: Check Node.js and NPM Version.

### Browser

There are many browsers out there. However, I strongly recommend Google Chrome.

### Installing Google Chrome

Install [Google Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/) if you do not have one yet. We can write small JavaScript code on the browser console, but we do not use the browser console to develop applications.

### Opening Google Chrome Console

You can open Google Chrome console either by clicking three dots at the top right corner of the browser, selecting *More tools -> Developer tools* or using a keyboard shortcut. I prefer using shortcuts.

To open the Chrome console using a keyboard shortcut.

`Mac
Command+Option+J

Windows/Linux:
Ctl+Shift+J`

After you open the Google Chrome console, try to explore the marked buttons. We will spend most of the time on the Console. The Console is the place where your JavaScript code goes. The Google Console V8 engine changes your JavaScript code to machine code. Let us write a JavaScript code on the Google Chrome console.

### Writing Code on Browser Console

We can write any JavaScript code on the Google console or any browser console. However, for this challenge, we only focus on Google Chrome console. Open the console using:

`Mac
Command+Option+I

Windows:
Ctl+Shift+I`

### Console.log

To write our first JavaScript code, we used a built-in function **console.log()**. We passed an argument as input data, and the function displays the output. We passed `'Hello, World'` as input data or argument in the console.log() function.

`console.log('Hello, World!')`

### Console.log with Multiple Arguments

The **`console.log()`** function can take multiple parameters separated by commas. The syntax looks like as follows:**`console.log(param1, param2, param3)`**

`console.log('Hello', 'World', '!')
console.log('HAPPY', 'NEW', 'YEAR', 2020)`

As you can see from the snippet code above, *`console.log()`* can take multiple arguments.

Congratulations! You wrote your first JavaScript code using *`console.log()`*.

### Comments

Comments are very important to make code more readable and to leave remarks in our code. JavaScript does not execute the comment part of our code. We have singleline comment `//` and multiline comment `/*`  `*/`.

**Syntax**

Programming languages have syntax. JavaScript is a programming language and like other programming languages it has its own syntax. If we do not write a syntax that JavaScript understands, it will raise different types of errors.

Syntax error is informative,It informs what type of error.By reading the error feedback guideline, we can correct the syntax and fix the problem.That was made console raises syntax errors.

The process of identifying and removing errors from a program is called **debugging.**

eg.`console.log('Hello, World!')`

How to display text using the *`console.log()`*. If we are printing text or string using *`console.log()`*, the text has to be inside the single quotes, double quotes, or a backtick. **Example:**

`console.log('Hello, World!')
console.log("Hello, World!")
console.log(`Hello, World!`)`

install js on Visual Studio?

[https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcRxbwdYSyckibfuRHKDDd4gdHxuzdSpc_baboZ7S3qi_A&s](https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcRxbwdYSyckibfuRHKDDd4gdHxuzdSpc_baboZ7S3qi_A&s)

**Go to the Visual Studio downloads page to install it for free**. If you need to install the workload and already have Visual Studio, go to Tools > Get Tools and Features..., which opens the Visual Studio Installer. Choose the ASP.NET and web development workload, then choose Modify.

## Adding JavaScript to a Web Page

JavaScript can be added to a web page in three different ways:

- ***Inline script:***We can create a pop up alert message using the *`alert()`* built-in function.
- ***Internal script:***The internal script can be written in the *`head`* or the *`body`*, but it is preferred to put it on the body of the HTML document.to see the output from the `console.log()`
- ***External script :  the external script link can be on the header or body, but it is preferred to put it in the body.First, we should create an external JavaScript file with .js extension. All files ending with .js extension are JavaScript files. Create a file named introduction.js inside your project directory and write the following code and link this .js file at the bottom of the body***
- ***Multiple External scripts:*** Create a `helloworld.js` file inside the 30DaysOfJS folder and write the following code.

# **Variables**

- Variables are *containers* of data. Variables are used to *store* data in a memory location. When a variable is declared, a memory location is reserved. When a variable is assigned to a value (data), the memory space will be filled with that data.
- To declare a variable, we use *var*, *let*, or *const* keywords

A valid JavaScript variable name must follow the following rules:

- A JavaScript variable name should not begin with a number.
- A JavaScript variable name does not allow special characters except dollar sign and underscore.
- A JavaScript variable name follows a camelCase convention.
- A JavaScript variable name should not have space between words.

### There is valid and invalid variables

valid variable:

```
first_name
last_name
is_married
capital_city
```

invalid variables:

```
first-name
  1_num
  num_#_1
```

- To declare a variable, we need to use *let* or *const* keyword before the variable name. Following the variable name, we write an equal sign (assignment operator), and a value(assigned data).

example:

```
// Declaring variables with number values
let age = 100 // age in years
const gravity = 9.81 // earth gravity  in m/s2
const boilingPoint = 100 // water boiling point, temperature in °C
const PI = 3.14 // geometrical constant
console.log(gravity, boilingPoint, PI)
output:9.81 100 3.14
```