# web-note3

# **Data Types**

Data types describe the characteristics of data. Data types can be divided into two:

1. Primitive data types: are immutable(non-modifiable) data types. If we try to modify the string stored in variable *word*, JavaScript should raise an error. Any data type under a single quote, double quote, or backtick quote is a string data type., include:
- Numbers - Integers, floats
- Strings - Any data under single quote, double quote or backtick quote
- Booleans - true or false value
- Null - empty value or no value
- Undefined - a declared variable without a value
- Symbol - A unique value that can be generated by Symbol constructor

example:

```
let numOne = 3
let numTwo = 3

console.log(numOne == numTwo)      // true

let js = 'JavaScript'
let py = 'Python'

console.log(js == py)             //false

let lightOn = true
let lightOff = false

console.log(lightOn == lightOff) // false
```

2. Non-primitive data types(Object References): modifiable or mutable,We can modify the value of non-primitive data types after it gets created.An array is a list of data values in a square bracket. Arrays can contain the same or different data types. Array values are referenced by their index. In JavaScript array index starts at zero.The ‘object’ is a non-primitive data type in JavaScript. Arrays and Functions in JavaScript belong to the ‘object’ data type.

include

1. Objects
2. Arrays

example:

```
let nums = [1, 2, 3]
let numbers = nums

console.log(nums == numbers)  // true

let userOne = {
name:'jone',
role:'learning',
country:'ethiopia'
}
let userTwo = userOne

console.log(userOne == userTwo)  // true
```

## Numbers

Numbers are integers and decimal values which can do all the arithmetic operations.

### Declaring Number Data Types

`let age = 35
const gravity = 9.81  // we use const for non-changing values, gravitational constant in  m/s2
let mass = 72         // mass in Kilogram
const PI = 3.14       // pi a geometrical constant`

### Math Object

 Math Object provides a lots of methods to work with numbers.

`const PI = Math.PI
console.log(PI)                            // 3.141592653589793
console.log(Math.round(PI))                // 3 to round values to the nearest number
console.log(Math.round(9.81))              // 10
console.log(Math.floor(PI))                // 3 rounding down
console.log(Math.ceil(PI))                 // 4 rounding up
console.log(Math.min(-5, 3, 20, 4, 5, 10)) // -5, returns the minimum value
console.log(Math.max(-5, 3, 20, 4, 5, 10)) // 20, returns the maximum value
const randNum = Math.random() // creates random number between 0 to 0.999999
console.log(randNum)`

```
// Let us  create random number between 0 to 10

const num = Math.floor(Math.random () * 11) // creates random number between 0 and 10
console.log(num)

//Absolute value
console.log(Math.abs(-10))      // 10

//Square root
console.log(Math.sqrt(100))     // 10

console.log(Math.sqrt(2))       // 1.4142135623730951

// Power
console.log(Math.pow(3, 2))     // 9

console.log(Math.E)             // 2.718

// Logarithm
// Returns the natural logarithm with base E of x, Math.log(x)
console.log(Math.log(2))        // 0.6931471805599453
console.log(Math.log(10))       // 2.302585092994046

// Returns the natural logarithm of 2 and 10 respectively
console.log(Math.LN2)           // 0.6931471805599453
console.log(Math.LN10)          // 2.302585092994046

// Trigonometry
Math.sin(0)
Math.sin(60)

Math.cos(0)
Math.cos(60)
```

### Random Number Generator

The JavaScript Math Object has a random() method number generator which generates number from 0 to 0.999999999...

```
let randomNum = Math.random() // generates 0 to 0.999...
```

 random() method to generate a random number between 0 and 10:

```
let randomNum = Math.random()         // generates 0 to 0.999
let numBtnZeroAndTen = randomNum * 11

console.log(numBtnZeroAndTen)         // this gives: min 0 and max 10.99

let randomNumRoundToFloor = Math.floor(numBtnZeroAndTen)
console.log(randomNumRoundToFloor)    // this gives between 0 and 10
```

## Strings

Strings are texts, which are under ***single*** , ***double***, ***back-tick*** quote.To declare a string, we need a variable name, assignment operator, a value under a single quote, double quote, or backtick quote.

 example: let space = ' '         
                let firstName = 'jone'

### String Concatenation

Connecting two or more strings together is called concatenation:

**Concatenating Using Addition Operator**

`let fullName = firstName + space + lastName; // concatenation, merging two string together.
console.log(fullName);`

### Long Literal Strings

A string could be a single character or paragraph or a page. If the string length is too big it does not fit in one line. We can use the backslash character (\) at the end of each line to indicate that the string will continue on the next line

example: const all=”i am studentof american college.\

                                 i live in adiss abeba,\ i am girl”

                              `console.log(all)`

### Escape Sequences in Strings

In JavaScript and other programming languages \ followed by some characters is an escape sequence. Let's see the most common escape characters:

- \n: new line
- \t: Tab, means 8 spaces
- \\: Back slash
- \': Single quote (')
- \": Double quote (")

### Template Literals (Template Strings)

We use two back-ticks. We can inject data as expressions inside a template string. To inject data, we enclose the expression with a curly bracket({}) preceded by a $ sign.

```markup
//Syntax
`String literal text`
`String literal text ${expression}`
```

example:

console.log(`The sum of 2 and 3 is 5`)              // statically writing the data
let a = 2
let b = 3
console.log(`The sum of ${a} and ${b} is ${a + b}`) // injecting the data dynamically

### String Methods

A string is a primitive data type that means we can not modify it once it is created. The string object has many string methods. There are different string methods that can help us to work with strings.

1. *length*: The string *length* method returns the number of characters in a string included empty space.

**Example:**

```
let js = 'JavaScript'
console.log(js.length)
```

1. *Accessing characters in a string*: We can access each character in a string using its index. In programming, counting starts from 0. The first index of the string is zero, and the last index is the length of the string minus one.

example:

```
let string = 'JavaScript'
let firstLetter = string[0]

console.log(firstLetter) //j
```

```
let lastIndex = string.length - 1

console.log(lastIndex)  // 9
console.log(string[lastIndex])    // t
```

1. *toUpperCase()*: this method changes the string to uppercase letters.

`let string = 'JavaScript'
console.log(string.toUpperCase())     // JAVASCRIPT`

1. *toLowerCase()*: this method changes the string to lowercase letters.

`let string = 'JavasCript'
console.log(string.toLowerCase())     // javascript`

1. *substr()*: It takes two arguments, the starting index and number of characters to slice.

`let string = 'JavaScript'
console.log(string.substr(4,6))    // Script`

1. *substring()*: It takes two arguments, the starting index and the stopping index but it doesn't include the character at the stopping index.

`let string = 'JavaScript'
console.log(string.substring(0,4))     // Java
console.log(string.substring(4,10))    // Script
console.log(string.substring(4))       // Script`

1. *split()*: The split method splits a string at a specified place.

`let string = '30 Days Of JavaScript'
console.log(string.split())     // Changes to an array -> ["30 Days Of JavaScript"]
console.log(string.split(' '))  // Split to an array at space -> ["30", "Days", "Of", "JavaScript"]`

1. *trim()*: Removes trailing space in the beginning or the end of a string.

`let string = '   30 Days Of JavaScript   '
console.log(string)
console.log(string.trim(' '))`

1. *includes()*: It takes a substring argument and it checks if substring argument exists in the string. *includes()* returns a boolean. If a substring exist in a string, it returns true, otherwise it returns false.

`let string = 'Days Of Mother'
console.log(string.includes('Days'))     // true
console.log(string.includes('days'))     // false - it is case sensitive!
console.log(string.includes('of'))   // true`

1. *replace()*: takes as a parameter the old substring and a new substring.

```
string.replace(oldsubstring, newsubstring)
```

example:

`let string = 'Days Of Mother'
console.log(string.replace('Mother', 'Father')) // Days Of Father`

1. *charAt()*: Takes index and it returns the value at that index

```
string.charAt(index)
```

`let string = 'Days Of Mother'
console.log(string.charAt(0))        // D`

1. *charCodeAt()*: Takes index and it returns char code (ASCII number) of the value at that index

```
string.charCodeAt(index)
```

```
let string = 'Days Of Mother'
console.log(string.charCodeAt(1))        // D ASCII number is 68

let lastIndex = string.length - 1
console.log(string.charCodeAt(lastIndex)) // r ASCII is 114
```

1. *indexOf()*: Takes a substring and if the substring exists in a string it returns the first position of the substring if does not exist it returns -1

```
string.indexOf(substring)
```

```
let string = 'Days Of Mother'

console.log(string.indexOf('D'))          // 1
console.log(string.indexOf('days'))       // -1
```

1. *lastIndexOf()*: Takes a substring and if the substring exists in a string it returns the last position of the substring if it does not exist it returns -1

```
//syntax
string.lastIndexOf(substring)
```

```
let string = 'I love JavaScript. If you do not love JavaScript what else can you love.'

console.log(string.lastIndexOf('love'))       // 67
console.log(string.lastIndexOf('you'))        // 63
console.log(string.lastIndexOf('JavaScript')) // 38
```

1. *concat()*: it takes many substrings and joins them.

```
string.concat(substring, substring, substring)
eg:
let country = 'Fin'
console.log(country.concat("land")) // Finland
```

16.  *startsWith*: it takes a substring as an argument and it checks if the string starts with that specified substring. It returns a boolean(true or false).

```
//syntax
string.startsWith(substring)
```

```
let string = 'Love is the best'

console.log(string.startsWith('Love'))   // true
console.log(string.startsWith('love'))   // false
console.log(string.startsWith('best'))  // false
```

1. *endsWith*: it takes a substring as an argument and it checks if the string ends with that specified substring. It returns a boolean(true or false).

```
string.endsWith(substring)
```

```
let string = 'Love is best'

console.log(string.endsWith('best'))         // true
console.log(string.endsWith('love'))          // false
console.log(string.endsWith('is best')) // true

```

1. *search*: it takes a substring as an argument and it returns the index of the first match. The search value can be a string or a regular expression pattern.

```
string.search(substring)
eg:
let string = 'I love JavaScript.'
console.log(string.search('love'))          // 2

```

1. *match*: it takes a substring or regular expression pattern as an argument and it returns an array if there is match if not it returns null. Let us see how a regular expression pattern looks like. It starts with / sign and ends with / sign.

```
let string = 'love'
let patternOne = /love/     // with out any flag
let patternTwo = /love/gi   // g-means to search in the whole text, i - case insensitive
```

```
 match syntax
string.match(substring)
eg:
let string = 'I love JavaScript. If you do not love JavaScript what else can you love.'
console.log(string.match('love'))
```

```
let pattern = /love/gi
console.log(string.match(pattern))   // ["love", "love", "love"]
```

1. *repeat()*: it takes a number as argument and it returns the repeated version of the string.

```
string.repeat(n)
```

example:

`let string = 'love'
console.log(string.repeat(10)) // lovelovelovelovelovelovelovelovelovelove`

## Checking Data Types and Casting

### Checking Data Types

To check the data type of a certain variable we use the *typeof* method.

example:

`let firstName = 'jone'`

console.log(typeof 'jone')  // string
console.log(typeof firstName)   // string

### Changing Data Type (Casting)

- Casting: Converting one data type to another data type. We use *parseInt()*, *parseFloat()*, *Number()*, *+ sign*, *str()* When we do arithmetic operations string numbers should be first converted to integer or float if not it returns an error.

### String to Int

We can convert string number to a number. Any number inside a quote is a string number. An example of a string number: '10', '5', etc. We can convert string to number using the following methods:

- parseInt()
- Number()
- Plus sign(+)

```
let num = '10'
let numInt = parseInt(num)
console.log(numInt) // 10
```

`let num = '10'
let numInt = Number(num)
console.log(numInt) // 10`

### String to Float

We can convert string float number to a float number. Any float number inside a quote is a string float number. An example of a string float number: '9.81', '3.14', '1.44', etc. We can convert string float to number using the following methods:

- parseFloat()
- Number()
- Plus sign(+)

eg:

`let num = '9.81'
let numFloat = parseFloat(num)
console.log(numFloat) // 9.81`

example2:

let num = '9.81'
let numFloat = Number(num)

console.log(numFloat) // 9.81

### Float to Int

 We use the following method to convert float to int:

- parseInt()

example:

`let num = 9.81
let numInt = parseInt(num)
console.log(numInt) // 9`

## Booleans

A boolean data type represents one of the two values:*true* or *false*. Boolean value is either true or false. Use of these  when you start the comparison operator.

```
let truValue = 4 > 3    // true
let falseValue = 4 < 3  // false
```

There is truthy and falsy values :

- All numbers(positive and negative) are truthy except zero, All strings are truthy except an empty string (''), The boolean true

falsy:

- 0, 0n, null, undefined, NaN, the boolean false, '', "", ``, empty string

## Undefined:

If we declare a variable and if we do not assign a value, the value will be undefined. 

```
let firstName
console.log(firstName) //not defined, because it is not assigned to a value yet
```

# Operators

Assignment operator: An equal sign in JavaScript is an assignment operator. It uses to assign a variable.

Arithmetic operators :are mathematical operators.

- Addition(+): a + b
- Subtraction(-): a - b
- Multiplication(*): a * b
- Division(/): a / b
- Modulus(%): a % b
- Exponential(**): a ** b

Comparision operator: use to compare the variable 

- equal in value and data type(==): x==y
- not equal(!=):x!=y
- greaterthan(>):x>y
- lessthan(<):x<y
- greaterthan or equal to(>=):x>=y
- lessthan or equal to(<=):x<=y

Logical operator: &&(ampersand) , ||(pipe) and !(negation). The && operator gets true only if the two operands are true. The || operator gets true either of the operand is true. The ! operator negates true to false and false to true.

Increment Operator: we use the increment operator to increase a value stored in a variable. The increment could be:

1. Pre-increment

`let count = 0
console.log(++count)        // 1
console.log(count)          // 1`

1. Post-increment

`let count = 0
console.log(count++)        // 0
console.log(count)          // 1`

Decrement Operator: we use the decrement operator to decrease a value stored in a variable. The decrement could be:

1. Pre-decrement

`let count = 0
console.log(--count) // -1
console.log(count)  // -1`

1. Post-decrement

`let count = 0
console.log(count--) // 0
console.log(count)   // -1`

Ternary Operators: allows to write a condition. Another way to write conditionals is using ternary operators.

example:

```
let isRaining = true
isRaining
  ? console.log('You need a rain coat.')
  : console.log('No need for a rain coat.')
isRaining = false

isRaining
  ? console.log('You need a rain coat.')
  : console.log('No need for a rain coat.'
//You need a rain coat.
//No need for a rain coat.
```

```
let number = 5
number > 0
  ? console.log(`${number} is a positive number`)
  : console.log(`${number} is a negative number`)
//5 is a positive number
```

**Operator precedence** determines how operators are parsed concerning each other. Operators with higher precedence become the operands of operators with lower precedence.

```
console.log(3 + 10 * 2); // 23
console.log(3 + (10 * 2)); // 23, because parentheses here are superfluous
console.log((3 + 10) * 2); // 26, because the parentheses change the order
```

## Window Methods

Window alert() method :alert() method displays an alert box with a specified message and an OK button. It is a builtin method and it takes on argument.

`alert(message)`

Window prompt methods display a prompt box with an input on your browser to take input values and the input data can be stored in a variable. The prompt() method takes two arguments. The second argument is optional.

```
prompt('required text', 'optional text')
```

`let number = prompt('Enter number', 'number goes here')
console.log(number)`

Window confirm() method displays a dialog box with a specified message, along with an OK and a Cancel button. A confirm box is often used to ask permission from a user to execute something. Window confirm() takes a string as an argument. Clicking the OK yields true value, whereas clicking the Cancel button yields false value.

`const agree = confirm('Are you sure you like to delete? ')
console.log(agree) // result will be true or false based on what you click on the dialog box`

## Date Object

In JavaScript current time and date is created using JavaScript Date Object. The object we create using Date object provides many methods to work with date and time.The methods we use to get date and time information from a date object values are started with a word *get* because it provide the information. 

- *getFullYear(), getMonth(), getDate(), getDay(), getHours(), getMinutes, getSeconds(), getMilliseconds(), getTime(), getDay()*

—Creating a Tme object

example:

```
const now = new Date()
console.log(now) // Sat Jan 04 2020 00:56:41 GMT+0200

const now = new Date()
console.log(now.getFullYear()) // 2020
```

Getting time

1. Using *getTime()*

```
const now = new Date() //
console.log(now.getTime()) // 1578092201341, this is the number of seconds passed from January 1, 1970 to January 4, 2020 00:56:41
```

1. Using *Date.now()*

`const allSeconds = Date.now() //
console.log(allSeconds) // 1578092201341, this is the number of seconds passed from January 1, 1970 to January 4, 2020 00:56:41
const timeInSeconds = new Date().getTime()
console.log(allSeconds == timeInSeconds) // true`

**Example:**

`const now = new Date()
const year = now.getFullYear() // return year
const month = now.getMonth() + 1 // return month(0 - 11)
const date = now.getDate() // return date (1 - 31)
const hours = now.getHours() // return number (0 - 23)
const minutes = now.getMinutes() // return number (0 -59)

console.log(`${date}/${month}/${year} ${hours}:${minutes}`) // 4/1/2020 0:56`